Background: Emotional eating (EE) is one of the most significant symptoms of various eating disorders. It has been difficult to collect a large amount of behavioral data on EE; therefore, only partial studies of this symptom have been conducted. To provide adequate support for online social media users with symptoms of EE, we must understand their behavior patterns to design a sophisticated personalized support system (PSS).
Objective: This study aimed to analyze the behavior patterns of emotional eaters as the first step to designing a personalized intervention system.
Methods: The machine learning (ML) framework and Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) topic modeling tool were used to collect and analyze behavioral data on EE. Data from a subcommunity of Reddit, /r/loseit, were analyzed. This dataset included all posts and feedback from July 2014 to May 2018, comprising 185,950 posts and 3,528,107 comments. In addition, deleted and improperly collected data were eliminated. Stochastic gradient descent-based ML classifier with an accuracy of 90.64% was developed to collect refined behavioral data of online users with EE behaviors. The expert group that labeled the dataset to train the ML classifiers included a medical doctor specializing in EE diagnosis and a nutritionist with profound knowledge of EE behavior. The experts labeled 5126 posts as EE (coded as 1) or others (coded as 0). Finally, the topic modeling process was conducted with LDA.
Results: The following 4 macroperspective topics of online EE behaviors were identified through linguistic evidence regarding each topic: addressing feelings, sharing physical changes, sharing and asking for dietary information, and sharing dietary strategies. The 5 main topics of feedback were dietary information, compliments, consolation, automatic bot feedback, and health information. The feedback topic distribution significantly differed depending on the type of EE behavior (overall P<.001).
Conclusions: This study introduces a data-driven approach for analyzing behavior patterns of social website users with EE behaviors. We discovered the possibility of the LDA topic model as an exploratory user study method for abnormal behaviors in medical research. We also investigated the possibilities of ML- and topic modeling-based classifiers to automatically categorize text-based behavioral data, which could be applied to personalized medicine in future research.