In this study, the goal was to develop a method for detecting and classifying organophosphorus pesticides (OPPs) in bodies of water. Sixty-five samples with different concentrations were prepared for each of the organophosphorus pesticides, namely chlorpyrifos, acephate, parathion-methyl, trichlorphon, dichlorvos, profenofos, malathion, dimethoate, fenthion, and phoxim, respectively. Firstly, the spectral data of all the samples was obtained using a UV-visible spectrometer. Secondly, five preprocessing methods, six manifold learning methods, and five machine learning algorithms were utilized to build detection models for identifying OPPs in water bodies. The findings indicate that the accuracy of machine learning models trained on data preprocessed using convolutional smoothing + first-order derivatives (SG + FD) outperforms that of models trained on data preprocessed using other methods. The backpropagation neural network (BPNN) model exhibited the highest accuracy rate at 99.95%, followed by the support vector machine (SVM) and convolutional neural network (CNN) models, both at 99.92%. The extreme learning machine (ELM) and K-nearest neighbors (KNN) models demonstrated accuracy rates of 99.84% and 99.81%, respectively. Following the application of a manifold learning algorithm to the full-wavelength data set for the purpose of dimensionality reduction, the data was then visualized in the first three dimensions. The results demonstrate that the t-distributed domain embedding (t-SNE) algorithm is superior, exhibiting dense clustering of similar clusters and clear classification of dissimilar ones. SG + FD-t-SNE-SVM ranks highest among the feature extraction models in terms of performance. The feature extraction dimension was set to 4, and the average classification accuracy was 99.98%, which slightly improved the prediction performance over the full-wavelength model. As shown in this study, the ultraviolet-visible (UV-visible) spectroscopy system combined with the t-SNE and SVM algorithms can effectively identify and classify OPPs in waterbodies.